readme.md, before:

# REST version of Spring PetClinic Sample Application (spring-framework-petclinic extend ) 

[![Java Build Status](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/actions/workflows/maven-build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/actions/workflows/maven-build.yml)
[![Docker Build Status](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml)

This backend version of the Spring Petclinic application only provides a REST API. **There is no UI**.
The [spring-petclinic-angular project](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-angular) is a Angular front-end application which consumes the REST API.

## Understanding the Spring Petclinic application with a few diagrams

[See the presentation of the Spring Petclinic Framework version](http://fr.slideshare.net/AntoineRey/spring-framework-petclinic-sample-application)

### Petclinic ER Model

![alt petclinic-ermodel](petclinic-ermodel.png)

## Running Petclinic locally

### With Maven command line
```sh
git clone https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest.git
cd spring-petclinic-rest
./mvnw spring-boot:run
```

### With Docker
```sh
docker run -p 9966:9966 springcommunity/spring-petclinic-rest
```

You can then access petclinic here: [http://localhost:9966/petclinic/](http://localhost:9966/petclinic/)

There is an actuator health check route as well:
* [http://localhost:9966/petclinic/actuator/health](http://localhost:9966/petclinic/actuator/health)

## OpenAPI REST API documentation

You can reach the Swagger UI with this URL (after application start):
[http://localhost:9966/petclinic/](http://localhost:9966/petclinic/swagger-ui.html).

You then can get the Open API description reaching this URL: [localhost:9966/petclinic/v3/api-docs](localhost:9966/petclinic/v3/api-docs).

## Screenshot of the Angular client

See its repository here: https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-angular

<img width="1427" alt="spring-petclinic-angular2" src="https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/838318/23263243/f4509c4a-f9dd-11e6-951b-69d0ef72d8bd.png">

## In case you find a bug/suggested improvement for Spring Petclinic
Our issue tracker is available here: https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/issues


## Database configuration

In its default configuration, Petclinic uses an in-memory database (HSQLDB) which gets populated at startup with data.

A similar setup is provided for MySQL and PostgreSQL if a persistent database configuration is needed.

Note that whenever the database type changes, the app needs to run with a different profile: `spring.profiles.active=mysql` for MySQL or `spring.profiles.active=postgres` for PostgreSQL.
See the [Spring Boot documentation](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/how-to/properties-and-configuration.html#howto.properties-and-configuration.set-active-spring-profiles) for more detail on how to set the active profile.
You can also change profile defined in the `application.properties` file.
For MySQL database, it is needed to change param `hsqldb` to `mysql` in the following line of `application.properies` file:
```properties
spring.profiles.active=hsqldb,spring-data-jpa
```

You can start MySQL or PostgreSQL locally with whatever installer works for your OS or use docker:

```bash
docker run -e MYSQL_USER=petclinic -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=petclinic -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=root -e MYSQL_DATABASE=petclinic -p 3306:3306 mysql:8.4
```

or

```bash
docker run -e POSTGRES_USER=petclinic -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=petclinic -e POSTGRES_DB=petclinic -p 5432:5432 postgres:16.3
```

Further documentation is provided for [MySQL](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic/blob/main/src/main/resources/db/mysql/petclinic_db_setup_mysql.txt)
and [PostgreSQL](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic/blob/main/src/main/resources/db/postgres/petclinic_db_setup_postgres.txt).

Instead of vanilla `docker` you can also use the provided `docker-compose.yml` file to start the database containers. Each one has a profile just like the Spring profile:

```bash
docker-compose --profile mysql up
```

or

```bash
docker-compose --profile postgres up
```


## API First Approach

This API is built following some [API First approach principles](https://swagger.io/resources/articles/adopting-an-api-first-approach/).

It is specified through the [OpenAPI](https://oai.github.io/Documentation/).
It is specified in this [file](./src/main/resources/openapi.yml).

Some of the required classes are generated during the build time. 
Here are the generated file types:
* DTOs
* API template interfaces specifying methods to override in the controllers

To see how to get them generated you can read the next chapter. 

## Generated code

Some of the required classes are generated during the build time using maven or any IDE (e.g., IntelliJ Idea or Eclipse).

All of these classes are generated into the ``target/generated-sources`` folder.

Here is a list of the generated packages and the corresponding tooling:

| Package name                                   | Tool             |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------|
| org.springframework.samples.petclinic.mapper   | [MapStruct](https://mapstruct.org/)        |
| org.springframework.samples.petclinic.rest.dto | [OpenAPI Generator maven plugin](https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-generator/) |


To get both, you have to run the following command:

```jshelllanguage
mvn clean install
```

## Security configuration
In its default configuration, Petclinic doesn't have authentication and authorization enabled.

### Basic Authentication
In order to use the basic authentication functionality, turn in on from the `application.properties` file
```properties
petclinic.security.enable=true
```
This will secure all APIs and in order to access them, basic authentication is required.
Apart from authentication, APIs also require authorization. This is done via roles that a user can have.
The existing roles are listed below with the corresponding permissions 

* `OWNER_ADMIN` -> `OwnerController`, `PetController`, `PetTypeController` (`getAllPetTypes` and `getPetType`), `VisitController`
* `VET_ADMIN`   -> `PetTypeController`, `SpecialityController`, `VetController`
* `ADMIN`       -> `UserController`

There is an existing user with the username `admin` and password `admin` that has access to all APIs.
 In order to add a new user, please make `POST /api/users` request with the following payload:

```json
{
    "username": "secondAdmin",
    "password": "password",
    "enabled": true,
    "roles": [
    	{ "name" : "OWNER_ADMIN" }
    ]
}
```

## Working with Petclinic in Eclipse/STS

### prerequisites
The following items should be installed in your system:
* Maven 3 (https://maven.apache.org/install.html)
* git command line tool (https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git)
* Eclipse with the m2e plugin (m2e is installed by default when using the STS (http://www.springsource.org/sts) distribution of Eclipse)

Note: when m2e is available, there is an m2 icon in Help -> About dialog.
If m2e is not there, just follow the install process here: http://eclipse.org/m2e/download/
* Eclipse with the [mapstruct plugin](https://mapstruct.org/documentation/ide-support/) installed.

### Steps:

1) In the command line
```sh
git clone https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest.git
```
2) Inside Eclipse
```
File -> Import -> Maven -> Existing Maven project
```


## Looking for something in particular?

| Layer | Source |
|--|--|
| REST API controllers | [REST folder](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/rest) |
| Service | [ClinicServiceImpl.java](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/service/ClinicServiceImpl.java) |
| JDBC | [jdbc folder](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/repository/jdbc) |
| JPA | [jpa folder](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/repository/jpa) |
| Spring Data JPA | [springdatajpa folder](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/repository/springdatajpa) |
| Tests | [AbstractClinicServiceTests.java](src/test/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/service/clinicService/AbstractClinicServiceTests.java) |


## Publishing a Docker image

This application uses [Google Jib]([https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib) to build an optimized Docker image into the [Docker Hub](https://cloud.docker.com/u/springcommunity/repository/docker/springcommunity/spring-petclinic-rest/) repository.
The [pom.xml](pom.xml) has been configured to publish the image with a the `springcommunity/spring-petclinic-rest`image name.

Command line to run:
```sh
mvn compile jib:build -X -DjibSerialize=true -Djib.to.auth.username=xxx -Djib.to.auth.password=xxxxx
```

## Interesting Spring Petclinic forks

The Spring Petclinic master branch in the main [spring-projects](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic)
GitHub org is the "canonical" implementation, currently based on Spring Boot and Thymeleaf.

This [spring-petclinic-rest](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/) project is one of the [several forks](https://spring-petclinic.github.io/docs/forks.html) 
hosted in a special GitHub org: [spring-petclinic](https://github.com/spring-petclinic).
If you have a special interest in a different technology stack
that could be used to implement the Pet Clinic then please join the community there.


# Contributing

The [issue tracker](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/issues) is the preferred channel for bug reports, features requests and submitting pull requests.

For pull requests, editor preferences are available in the [editor config](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/blob/master/.editorconfig) for easy use in common text editors. Read more and download plugins at <http://editorconfig.org>.

Commit message:

Update readme.md with a note on main differences of the fork

readme.md, after:

> [!NOTE]
>
> This fork contains several artificially introduced bugs to showcase various techniques for performance troubleshooting. See the `perf` [package](https://github.com/Toparvion/spring-petclinic-rest/tree/master/src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/service/perf) for corresponding classes or [this page](https://toparvion.pro/project/bugclinic/) (in Russian only so far) for description and explanation of the bugs.



# REST version of Spring PetClinic Sample Application (spring-framework-petclinic extend ) 

[![Java Build Status](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/actions/workflows/maven-build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/actions/workflows/maven-build.yml)
[![Docker Build Status](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/actions/workflows/docker-build.yml)

This backend version of the Spring Petclinic application only provides a REST API. **There is no UI**.
The [spring-petclinic-angular project](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-angular) is a Angular front-end application which consumes the REST API.

## Understanding the Spring Petclinic application with a few diagrams

[See the presentation of the Spring Petclinic Framework version](http://fr.slideshare.net/AntoineRey/spring-framework-petclinic-sample-application)

### Petclinic ER Model

![alt petclinic-ermodel](petclinic-ermodel.png)

## Running Petclinic locally

### With Maven command line
```sh
git clone https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest.git
cd spring-petclinic-rest
./mvnw spring-boot:run
```

### With Docker
```sh
docker run -p 9966:9966 springcommunity/spring-petclinic-rest
```

You can then access petclinic here: [http://localhost:9966/petclinic/](http://localhost:9966/petclinic/)

There is an actuator health check route as well:
* [http://localhost:9966/petclinic/actuator/health](http://localhost:9966/petclinic/actuator/health)

## OpenAPI REST API documentation

You can reach the Swagger UI with this URL (after application start):
[http://localhost:9966/petclinic/](http://localhost:9966/petclinic/swagger-ui.html).

You then can get the Open API description reaching this URL: [localhost:9966/petclinic/v3/api-docs](localhost:9966/petclinic/v3/api-docs).

## Screenshot of the Angular client

See its repository here: https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-angular

<img width="1427" alt="spring-petclinic-angular2" src="https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/838318/23263243/f4509c4a-f9dd-11e6-951b-69d0ef72d8bd.png">

## In case you find a bug/suggested improvement for Spring Petclinic
Our issue tracker is available here: https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/issues


## Database configuration

In its default configuration, Petclinic uses an in-memory database (HSQLDB) which gets populated at startup with data.

A similar setup is provided for MySQL and PostgreSQL if a persistent database configuration is needed.

Note that whenever the database type changes, the app needs to run with a different profile: `spring.profiles.active=mysql` for MySQL or `spring.profiles.active=postgres` for PostgreSQL.
See the [Spring Boot documentation](https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/how-to/properties-and-configuration.html#howto.properties-and-configuration.set-active-spring-profiles) for more detail on how to set the active profile.
You can also change profile defined in the `application.properties` file.
For MySQL database, it is needed to change param `hsqldb` to `mysql` in the following line of `application.properies` file:
```properties
spring.profiles.active=hsqldb,spring-data-jpa
```

You can start MySQL or PostgreSQL locally with whatever installer works for your OS or use docker:

```bash
docker run -e MYSQL_USER=petclinic -e MYSQL_PASSWORD=petclinic -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=root -e MYSQL_DATABASE=petclinic -p 3306:3306 mysql:8.4
```

or

```bash
docker run -e POSTGRES_USER=petclinic -e POSTGRES_PASSWORD=petclinic -e POSTGRES_DB=petclinic -p 5432:5432 postgres:16.3
```

Further documentation is provided for [MySQL](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic/blob/main/src/main/resources/db/mysql/petclinic_db_setup_mysql.txt)
and [PostgreSQL](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic/blob/main/src/main/resources/db/postgres/petclinic_db_setup_postgres.txt).

Instead of vanilla `docker` you can also use the provided `docker-compose.yml` file to start the database containers. Each one has a profile just like the Spring profile:

```bash
docker-compose --profile mysql up
```

or

```bash
docker-compose --profile postgres up
```


## API First Approach

This API is built following some [API First approach principles](https://swagger.io/resources/articles/adopting-an-api-first-approach/).

It is specified through the [OpenAPI](https://oai.github.io/Documentation/).
It is specified in this [file](./src/main/resources/openapi.yml).

Some of the required classes are generated during the build time. 
Here are the generated file types:
* DTOs
* API template interfaces specifying methods to override in the controllers

To see how to get them generated you can read the next chapter. 

## Generated code

Some of the required classes are generated during the build time using maven or any IDE (e.g., IntelliJ Idea or Eclipse).

All of these classes are generated into the ``target/generated-sources`` folder.

Here is a list of the generated packages and the corresponding tooling:

| Package name                                   | Tool             |
|------------------------------------------------|------------------|
| org.springframework.samples.petclinic.mapper   | [MapStruct](https://mapstruct.org/)        |
| org.springframework.samples.petclinic.rest.dto | [OpenAPI Generator maven plugin](https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-generator/) |


To get both, you have to run the following command:

```jshelllanguage
mvn clean install
```

## Security configuration
In its default configuration, Petclinic doesn't have authentication and authorization enabled.

### Basic Authentication
In order to use the basic authentication functionality, turn in on from the `application.properties` file
```properties
petclinic.security.enable=true
```
This will secure all APIs and in order to access them, basic authentication is required.
Apart from authentication, APIs also require authorization. This is done via roles that a user can have.
The existing roles are listed below with the corresponding permissions 

* `OWNER_ADMIN` -> `OwnerController`, `PetController`, `PetTypeController` (`getAllPetTypes` and `getPetType`), `VisitController`
* `VET_ADMIN`   -> `PetTypeController`, `SpecialityController`, `VetController`
* `ADMIN`       -> `UserController`

There is an existing user with the username `admin` and password `admin` that has access to all APIs.
 In order to add a new user, please make `POST /api/users` request with the following payload:

```json
{
    "username": "secondAdmin",
    "password": "password",
    "enabled": true,
    "roles": [
    	{ "name" : "OWNER_ADMIN" }
    ]
}
```

## Working with Petclinic in Eclipse/STS

### prerequisites
The following items should be installed in your system:
* Maven 3 (https://maven.apache.org/install.html)
* git command line tool (https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git)
* Eclipse with the m2e plugin (m2e is installed by default when using the STS (http://www.springsource.org/sts) distribution of Eclipse)

Note: when m2e is available, there is an m2 icon in Help -> About dialog.
If m2e is not there, just follow the install process here: http://eclipse.org/m2e/download/
* Eclipse with the [mapstruct plugin](https://mapstruct.org/documentation/ide-support/) installed.

### Steps:

1) In the command line
```sh
git clone https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest.git
```
2) Inside Eclipse
```
File -> Import -> Maven -> Existing Maven project
```


## Looking for something in particular?

| Layer | Source |
|--|--|
| REST API controllers | [REST folder](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/rest) |
| Service | [ClinicServiceImpl.java](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/service/ClinicServiceImpl.java) |
| JDBC | [jdbc folder](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/repository/jdbc) |
| JPA | [jpa folder](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/repository/jpa) |
| Spring Data JPA | [springdatajpa folder](src/main/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/repository/springdatajpa) |
| Tests | [AbstractClinicServiceTests.java](src/test/java/org/springframework/samples/petclinic/service/clinicService/AbstractClinicServiceTests.java) |


## Publishing a Docker image

This application uses [Google Jib]([https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/jib) to build an optimized Docker image into the [Docker Hub](https://cloud.docker.com/u/springcommunity/repository/docker/springcommunity/spring-petclinic-rest/) repository.
The [pom.xml](pom.xml) has been configured to publish the image with a the `springcommunity/spring-petclinic-rest`image name.

Command line to run:
```sh
mvn compile jib:build -X -DjibSerialize=true -Djib.to.auth.username=xxx -Djib.to.auth.password=xxxxx
```

## Interesting Spring Petclinic forks

The Spring Petclinic master branch in the main [spring-projects](https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic)
GitHub org is the "canonical" implementation, currently based on Spring Boot and Thymeleaf.

This [spring-petclinic-rest](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/) project is one of the [several forks](https://spring-petclinic.github.io/docs/forks.html) 
hosted in a special GitHub org: [spring-petclinic](https://github.com/spring-petclinic).
If you have a special interest in a different technology stack
that could be used to implement the Pet Clinic then please join the community there.


# Contributing

The [issue tracker](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/issues) is the preferred channel for bug reports, features requests and submitting pull requests.

For pull requests, editor preferences are available in the [editor config](https://github.com/spring-petclinic/spring-petclinic-rest/blob/master/.editorconfig) for easy use in common text editors. Read more and download plugins at <http://editorconfig.org>.
